---
title: "Learning Interestingness in Automated Mathematical Theory Formation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-Fermat
excerpt: 'We take two key steps in automating the open-ended discovery of new mathematical theories, a grand challenge in artificial intelligence. First, we introduce FERMAT, a reinforcement learning (RL) environment that models concept discovery and theorem-proving using a set of symbolic actions, opening up a range of RL problems relevant to theory discovery. Second, we explore a specific problem through FERMAT: automatically scoring the interestingness of mathematical objects. We investigate evolutionary algorithms for synthesizing nontrivial interestingness measures. In particular, we introduce an LLM-based evolutionary algorithm that features function abstraction, leading to notable improvements in discovering elementary number theory and finite fields over hard-coded baselines. We open-source the FERMAT environment at this https://github.com/trishullab/Fermat.'
date: 2025-11-05
venue: 'NeurIPS 2025 Spotlight Paper'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.14778'
---
We take two key steps in automating the open-ended discovery of new mathematical theories, a grand challenge in artificial intelligence. First, we introduce FERMAT, a reinforcement learning (RL) environment that models concept discovery and theorem-proving using a set of symbolic actions, opening up a range of RL problems relevant to theory discovery. Second, we explore a specific problem through FERMAT: automatically scoring the interestingness of mathematical objects. We investigate evolutionary algorithms for synthesizing nontrivial interestingness measures. In particular, we introduce an LLM-based evolutionary algorithm that features function abstraction, leading to notable improvements in discovering elementary number theory and finite fields over hard-coded baselines. We open-source the FERMAT environment at this https://github.com/trishullab/Fermat.
[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.14778)
